Ts constrained manual (#4985)
input-output-hk/cardano-ledger: docs/constrained-generators/manual.md

Reviewer: Try putting `haskell` after the triple backticks in the examples to get better markdown:
```haskell
foo :: Int -> Int
foo = (+1)
```

Author: done

Reviewer: One useful thing we could add to this module is something like exercises for the reader - telling them to write a specification and test it / measure the distribution. This could allow us to talk about the finer points of dependency management in a "show not tell" fashion.

Author: I think a guided set of examples is a good idea. That was the original purpose of the Examples.CheastSheet.hs
file. Perhaps we could repurpose that as a companion to this file?

Constrained Generators Manual

# Constrained Generators is a First-Order Logic

A First-order typed logic has 4 components

1. **Terms** consisting of 
   - Variables: `x`, `y` . 
   - Constants: `5`, `"abc"`, `True` . 

>    - Applications: `f x 5`.  Applications, apply a function symbol to a list of arguments: `FunctionSymbol term1 .. termN`

Reviewer: ```suggestion
   - Applications: `elem_ "abc" xs`.
```

> 2. **Predicates**   (x == 5)

Reviewer: Mention that these are really just _boolean terms_

Author: done

>    - Applications: `elem_ "abc" xs`.  Applications apply a function symbol (i.e. `elem_`) to a list of Terms

Reviewer 2: This looks like `elem_ "abc" xs` should be under `Predicates`

Author: Actually elem_  creates a (Term Bool), so it is a function symbol
We'd have to say "Assert (elem_ x y)" to be a Predicate

# Constrained Generators Manual

The markdown source of this file can be obtained

> [here](https://github.com/IntersectMBO/cardano-ledger/blob/ts-constrained-manual/docs/constrained-generators/manual.md)

Reviewer 3: The link URL should be changed since the `ts-constrained-manual` branch will be deleted when this PR is merged:

```suggestion
[here](https://github.com/IntersectMBO/cardano-ledger/blob/master/docs/constrained-generators/manual.md)
```

Author: thanks, I didn't think about this.

All the examples in this file can be obtained 

> [here](https://github.com/IntersectMBO/cardano-ledger/blob/ts-constrained-manual/docs/constrained-generators/ManualExamples.hs)

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
[here](https://github.com/IntersectMBO/cardano-ledger/blob/master/docs/constrained-generators/ManualExamples.hs)
```

<!-- markdown-toc start - Don't edit this section. Run M-x markdown-toc-refresh-toc -->

> **Table of Contents**

Reviewer 3: FYI, GitHub can generate and display a TOC on the fly when [viewing the whole file](https://github.com/IntersectMBO/cardano-ledger/blob/ts-constrained-manual/docs/constrained-generators/manual.md) (ie not the diff). GH calls it an "outline" and its display is toggled using the 'bullet list' icon at the RHS of the toobar in view mode.

Author: I didn't know that.

    - [Explanations](#explanations)
    - [Operations to define and use Specifications](#operations-to-define-and-use-specifications)
    - [Utility functions](#utility-functions)
    - [Escape Hatch to QuickCheck Gen monad](#escape-hatch-to-quickcheck-gen-monad)
- [Strategy for constraining a large type with many nested sub-components.](#strategy-for-constraining-a-large-type-with-many-nested-sub-components)
- [Writing HasSpec instances by hand.](#writing-hasspec-instances-by-hand)
    - [Strategy 1 using GHC.Generics](#strategy-1-using-ghcgenerics)
    - [Strategy 2 writing your own SimpleRep instance](#strategy-2-writing-your-own-simplerep-instance)
    - [Strategy 3 defining the SimpleRep instance in terms of another type with a SimpleRep instance](#strategy-3-defining-the-simplerep-instance-in-terms-of-another-type-with-a-simplerep-instance)
    - [Strategy 4, bypassing SimpleRep, and write the HasSpec instance by Hand](#strategy-4-bypassing-simplerep-and-write-the-hasspec-instance-by-hand)
- [A look into the internals of the system.](#a-look-into-the-internals-of-the-system)

<!-- markdown-toc end -->

## Constrained Generators is a First-Order Logic

> A First-order typed logic has 4 components

Reviewer 4: I'm surprised to see that the description of a typed logic doesn't mention types at all.

Author: It does now. Thanks for the good idea.

1. **Terms** consisting of 
   - Variables: `x`, `y` . 
   - Constants: `5`, `"abc"`, `True` . 

>    - Applications: `elem_ "abc" xs`.  Applications apply a function symbol (i.e. `elem_`) to a list of Terms

Reviewer 3: It might be worth mentioning that functions can also be infix operators like `==.`. Although this follows from the fact that this is a Haskell EDSL, it could be helpful to someone not familiar with First-Order Typed Logic, especially since `x ==. 5` appears immediately below.

Author: done

2. **Predicates**   (Assert (x ==. 5)). Predicates are the assertions of boolean typed terms.

> 3. **Connectives**  (And, Or, Not, =>, ...).  Connectives make complicated Predicates out of simpler ones.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
3. **Connectives**  (And, Or, Not, =>, ...).  Connectives make more complex Predicates out of simpler ones.
```

"complicated" sounds a little offputting!

4. **Quantifiers**  (Forall, Exists)

> The **Constrained generators** system allows programmers to write Haskell programs with type `(Specification T)` that denotes a set of random values for the type `T`, that are subject to a set of constraints. This supports property based testing where a completely random set of values may not be useful.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
The **Constrained generators** system allows programmers to write Haskell programs with type `(Specification T)` that denotes a set of random values for the type `T`, that are subject to a set of constraints expressed as Predicates. This supports property based testing where a completely random set of values may not be useful.
```

> The **Constrained generators** system allows programmers to write Haskell programs with type `(Specification T)` that denotes a set of random values for the type `T`, that are subject to a set of constraints. This supports property based testing where a completely random set of values may not be useful.

Reviewer 4: At this point is not clear to me what the relation between a FOTL and Constrained generators might be.

Author: OK I added some text clarifying the relationship.  Good point.

> The **Constrained generators** system allows programmers to write Haskell programs with type `(Specification T)` that denotes a set of random values for the type `T`, that are subject to a set of constraints. This supports property based testing where a completely random set of values may not be useful.

Reviewer 4: Maybe remove the parenthesis around the type (since it is the object of the phrase).
```suggestion
The **Constrained generators** system allows programmers to write Haskell programs with type `Specification T` that denotes a set of random values for the type `T`, that are subject to a set of constraints. This supports property based testing where a completely random set of values may not be useful.
```

Author: done

> The Haskell Constraint `(HasSpec a)` states that the type `a` has been admitted to the system as one of the types 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The Haskell Constraint `HasSpec a` states that the type `a` has been admitted to the system as one of the types 
```

> that can be subject to constraints. The system comes with a large set of types that are already admitted, including

Reviewer: ```suggestion
that can be subject to constraints. The system comes with a large set of `HasSpec` instances, including for
```

> 1. Boolean

Reviewer: ```suggestion
1. Bool
```

2. Tuples

> 3. Sums

Reviewer: I wouldn't mention this here as it's part of the generics plumbing

Author: changed

10. Either
11. ()

## HasSpec instances

`HasSpec` instances can always be added to admit more types. Any type with a `GHC.Generics(Generic)` instance can be 
given a default instance by using its Sum-of-Products generic definition. In the Cardano Ledger System 
over 200 types have been given `HasSpec` instances, either by using the `GHC.Generics` path, or by writing the instances by hand.

## Building logic specifications using Haskell functions

Note that `constrained` and `match` take functions, which abstract over terms, and return `Specification` and `Pred`. 
Using the library functions, variables in the Term language are always introduced using Haskell lambda abstractions. And the library
functions combine these into Terms, Preds, and Specifications.

## Another example using conjunction and simple arithmetic

> Suppose we want to put more than one simple condition on the pair of Ints. We would do that using the connective `And` that converts a `[Pred]` into a `Pred`

Reviewer: Do we want to talk about the fact that you don't need `And` here? Or is it better to show the "basic" syntax first?

Also, could we perhaps not encourage users to use the raw constructors? I'd like to get to a point where we aren't exposing so much of the internals from the library.

Author: This is a bit tricky, as And is really the only connective we support directly, so I'd like to include a discussion about it. 
We can't use `and` as that already has a Haskell definition, and `and_` isn't appropriate because it is not a function symbol.  So I show the basic syntax first. And then in a future section we talk about IsPred, and discuss how this
Haskell class overloading makes things more generally useful.

     assert (x <=. (y + lit 2))
```	

The library uses Haskell lambda expressions to introduce variables in the Term language of the system,
and Haskell functions to build Terms and Predicates. The Haskell function `lit` takes Haskell values 
and turns them into constants in the Term language. The types of the Haskell functions used in the 
above definitions are

```

> constrained :: HasSpec a => (Term a -> Pred) -> Specification a

Reviewer 3: I found it slightly confusing that `match` works only on pairs, which is less general than I would have expected from the name. (Perhaps it could have been called `matchPair`).

I realize that's not the fault of the documentation, but it's a potential stumbling block for readers. I'm not sure how you'd address that, though, without making things too detailed for this point in the discussion. Perhaps a sentence similar to the one about `lit`, saying, "The Haskell function `match` is used for binding the two halves of a pair to new variables"?

Author: Actually, match has a much more general type, that is discussed later.  I will try to make that clearer here.

  2.  `singletonList_ :: (Sized [a], HasSpec a) => Term a -> Term [a]`
  3.  `append_  :: (Sized [a], HasSpec a) => Term [a] -> Term [a] -> Term [a]`
  
## `HasSpec a => HasSpec (Set a)`

The function symbols of `(Set a)` are:

  1.  `singleton_ :: (Ord a, HasSpec a) => Term a -> Term (Set a)`
  2.  `union_ :: (Ord a, HasSpec a) => Term (Set a) -> Term (Set a) -> Term (Set a)`
  3.  `subset_ :: (Ord a, HasSpec a) => Term (Set a) -> Term (Set a) -> Term Bool`
  4.  `member_ :: (Ord a, HasSpec a) => Term a -> Term (Set a) -> Term Bool`
  5.  `disjoint_ :: (Ord a, HasSpec a) => Term (Set a) -> Term (Set a) -> Term Bool`
  6.  `fromList_ :: (Ord a, HasSpec a) => Term [a] -> Term (Set a)`

## `(HasSpec k, HasSpec v) => HasSpec (Mapk v)`

The function symbols of `(Map k v)` are:

1.  `dom_ :: Ord k => Term(Map k v) -> Term (Set k)`
2.  `rng_ :: Ord k => Term (Map k v) -> Term [v]`
3.  `lookup_ :: Ord k => Term k -> Term (Map k v) -> Term (Maybe v)`

## `(HasSpec k, HasSpec v) => HasSpec (Mapk v)`

The function symbols of `(Map k v)` are:

1.  `dom_ :: Ord k => Term(Map k v) -> Term (Set k)`
2.  `rng_ :: Ord k => Term (Map k v) -> Term [v]`

> 3.  `lookup_ :: Ord k => Term k -> Term (Map k v) -> Term (Maybe v)`

Reviewer 2: I think these are hard to keep up to date and you can find this information from the generated Haddock anyways.

Author: Unlike Haddock, which tends to follow the structure of the Haskell files, This section groups all the function symbols (by their type) into one section for easy reference.

(member_ :: HasSpec a => Term a -> Term (Set a) -> Term Bool)
```

## Predefined HasSpec instances and their function symbols.

In order to write specification for a particular type, that type must have a `HasSpec` instance. 
A type with a `HasSpec` instance might have a number of Function Symbols that operate on that type.
There are a number of types that have predefined `HasSpec` instances. We list them here along with the
type of their function symbols.

## Numeric types

> `(Int,Integer, Natural, Int8, Int16, Int32, Int64, Word8, Word16, Word32, Word62)`

Reviewer: ```suggestion
`(Int, Integer, Natural, Int8, Int16, Int32, Int64, Word8, Word16, Word32, Word62)`
```

The function symbols of numeric types are:

 1. `(<=.) :: OrdLike a => Term a -> Term a -> Term Bool`
 2. `(<.) :: OrdLike a => Term a -> Term a -> Term Bool`
 3. `(>=.) :: OrdLike a => Term a -> Term a -> Term Bool`
 4. `(>.) :: OrdLike a => Term a -> Term a -> Term Bool`
 5. `(==.) :: HasSpec a => Term a -> Term a -> Term Bool`
 6.  A partial Num instance for (Term n) where n is a Numeric type. Operators `(+)`, `(-)`, `(*)`
 
## `HasSpec Bool`

The function symbols of `Bool` are:

  1.  `or_ :: Term Bool -> Term Bool -> Term Bool`
  2.  `not_ :: Term Bool -> Term Bool`
 
## `HaSpec a => HasSpec [a]`

The function symbols of `[a]` are:

>   1.  `foldMap_ ::(Sized [a],Foldy b,HasSpec a)=> (Term a -> Term b) -> Term [a] -> Term b`

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  1.  `foldMap_ :: (Sized [a], Foldy b, HasSpec a) => (Term a -> Term b) -> Term [a] -> Term b`
```

  2.  `singletonList_ :: (Sized [a], HasSpec a) => Term a -> Term [a]`
  3.  `append_  :: (Sized [a], HasSpec a) => Term [a] -> Term [a] -> Term [a]`
  
## `HasSpec a => HasSpec (Set a)`

The function symbols of `(Set a)` are:

  1.  `singleton_ :: (Ord a, HasSpec a) => Term a -> Term (Set a)`
  2.  `union_ :: (Ord a, HasSpec a) => Term (Set a) -> Term (Set a) -> Term (Set a)`
  3.  `subset_ :: (Ord a, HasSpec a) => Term (Set a) -> Term (Set a) -> Term Bool`
  4.  `member_ :: (Ord a, HasSpec a) => Term a -> Term (Set a) -> Term Bool`
  5.  `disjoint_ :: (Ord a, HasSpec a) => Term (Set a) -> Term (Set a) -> Term Bool`
  6.  `fromList_ :: (Ord a, HasSpec a) => Term [a] -> Term (Set a)`

> ## `(HasSpec k,HasSpec v) => HasSpec (Mapk v)`

Reviewer: ```suggestion
## `(HasSpec k, HasSpec v) => HasSpec (Mapk v)`
```

The function symbols of `(Map k v)` are:

1.  `dom_ :: Ord k => Term(Map k v) -> Term (Set k)`
2.  `rng_ :: Ord k => Term (Map k v) -> Term [v]`
3.  `lookup_ :: Ord k => Term k -> Term (Map k v) -> Term (Maybe v)`

> # How we solve the constraints

Reviewer: This is a bit of a jump. We've just talked about the syntax of writing `Specification` with two examples. It would be useful here to talk about generating and checking from specifications before we talk about how it actually works.

Author: That is a good idea. I have added a new section about generating and checking specifications.

> and are named using the convention that we add the dot `(.) to the end of the Haskell operator.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
and are named using the convention that we add the dot (`.`) to the end of the Haskell operator.
```

Author: done

A similar naming convention holds for prefix function symbols, except instead of adding a

> dot to the end of the Haskell name, we add an underscore `(_) to the end of the Haskell prefix functions's

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
dot to the end of the Haskell name, we add an underscore (`_`) to the end of the Haskell prefix functions's
```

Author: done

name. Some examples follow.

> 

Reviewer 3: These look very much like `Applicative` lifting. If `Term` doesn't have an `Applicative` instance, it might be worth mentioning that here, just to settle the question in the reader's mind right from the outset. OTOH, if there is an `Applicative` instance and the underscore functions are just more succinct, that would also be worth mentioning.

Author: So the lifting is much more complex than an Applicative instance. As it also knows how to reason about the application.  I added some text pointing this out.

(member_ :: HasSpec a => Term a -> Term (Set a) -> Term Bool)
```

## Predefined HasSpec instances and their function symbols.

> In order to write specification for a particular type, that type must have a `HasSpec` instance. 

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
In order to write a specification for a particular type, that type must have a `HasSpec` instance. 
```

A type with a `HasSpec` instance might have a number of Function Symbols that operate on that type.
There are a number of types that have predefined `HasSpec` instances. As a reference, we list them 

> here along with the type of their function symbols.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
here along with the types of their function symbols.
```

Author: done

### Function symbols for numeric types

`(Int, Integer, Natural, Int8, Int16, Int32, Int64, Word8, Word16, Word32, Word64)`

The function symbols of numeric types are:

 1. `(<=.) :: OrdLike a => Term a -> Term a -> Term Bool`
 2. `(<.) :: OrdLike a => Term a -> Term a -> Term Bool`
 3. `(>=.) :: OrdLike a => Term a -> Term a -> Term Bool`
 4. `(>.) :: OrdLike a => Term a -> Term a -> Term Bool`

>  5. `(==.) :: HasSpec a => Term a -> Term a -> Term Bool`

Reviewer 3: I'd have expected this to have an `EqLike` constraint. Maybe that's a superclass of `HasSpec`?

Author: That is a reasonable assumption, and correct assumption
class (Eq a, Show a) => HasType a where .. 

I added it to the type in the text, even though it is not needed.

 6.  A partial Num instance for (Term n) where n is a Numeric type. Operators `(+)`, `(-)`, `(*)`
 
### ` Function symbols for Bool`

The function symbols of `Bool` are:

  1.  `or_ :: Term Bool -> Term Bool -> Term Bool`
  2.  `not_ :: Term Bool -> Term Bool`
 
###  Function symbols for List

> `HaSpec a => HasSpec [a]`

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
`HasSpec a => HasSpec [a]`
```

The function symbols of `[a]` are:

  1.  `foldMap_ :: (Sized [a], Foldy b, HasSpec a) => (Term a -> Term b) -> Term [a] -> Term b`
  2.  `singletonList_ :: (Sized [a], HasSpec a) => Term a -> Term [a]`
  3.  `append_  :: (Sized [a], HasSpec a) => Term [a] -> Term [a] -> Term [a]`
  
###  Function symbols for Set

`HasSpec a => HasSpec (Set a)`

The function symbols of `(Set a)` are:

  1.  `singleton_ :: (Ord a, HasSpec a) => Term a -> Term (Set a)`
  2.  `union_ :: (Ord a, HasSpec a) => Term (Set a) -> Term (Set a) -> Term (Set a)`
  3.  `subset_ :: (Ord a, HasSpec a) => Term (Set a) -> Term (Set a) -> Term Bool`
  4.  `member_ :: (Ord a, HasSpec a) => Term a -> Term (Set a) -> Term Bool`
  5.  `disjoint_ :: (Ord a, HasSpec a) => Term (Set a) -> Term (Set a) -> Term Bool`
  6.  `fromList_ :: (Ord a, HasSpec a) => Term [a] -> Term (Set a)`

###  Function symbols for Map

> `(HasSpec k, HasSpec v) => HasSpec (Mapk k v)`

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
`(HasSpec k, HasSpec v) => HasSpec (Map k v)`
```

Author: done

The function symbols of `(Map k v)` are:

> 1.  `dom_ :: Ord k => Term(Map k v) -> Term (Set k)`

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
1.  `dom_ :: Ord k => Term (Map k v) -> Term (Set k)`
```

2.  `rng_ :: Ord k => Term (Map k v) -> Term [v]`
3.  `lookup_ :: Ord k => Term k -> Term (Map k v) -> Term (Maybe v)`

## Generating from and checking against specifications

Once we have written a `Specification` what can we do with it? Specifications have two interpretations.

1.  We can interpret it as a generator of values the meet all the constraints inside the specification.
2.  We can interpret it as a function that checks if a given value meets all the constraints inside the specification.

The first interpretation of the specification is the function `genFromSpec`

```
-- Generate a value from the spec in the QuickCheck monad 'Gen'
genFromSpec:: (HasCallStack, HasSpec a) => Specification a -> QuickCheck.Gen a
```

This function is very useful when writing QuickCheck properties. With it we can write 
`Gen` instances that are not completely random, but instead meet a set of constraints.

> Consider a system of 4 variables (w,x,y,z) where we want to test the QuickCheck *implication*  property

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
Consider a system of 4 variables _w,x,y,z_ where we want to test the QuickCheck *implication*  property
```

`(w < x && x < y && y < z) ==> property (w < z)`
We might write a QuickCheck property like this

```
prop1 :: Gen Property
prop1 = do
   (w,x,y,z) <- arbitrary :: Gen (Int,Int,Int,Int)
   pure $ (w < x && x < y && y < z) ==> property (w < z)
```

> The problem with this is that the probability that the precedant `(w < x && x < y && y < z)` is True, for random

Reviewer 3: I'm not familiar with the word "precedant" (unless it's a typo for "precedent"). Either way, I think "condition" would be a more familiar term for programmers.

```suggestion
The problem with this is that the probability that the condition `(w < x && x < y && y < z)` is `True`, for random
```

`w`, `x`, `y`, and `z`, is pretty low, so the property will pass vacuously most of the time, making a poor test.
We can observe this by

```
ghci> quickCheck prop1
*** Gave up! Passed only 29 tests; 1000 discarded tests.
```

A vacuous pass, becomes a QuickCheck `discard`, so we cannot find 100 successful passes.

> We can do a better job by constraining the precedant using `genFromSpec`

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
We can do a better job by constraining the input using `genFromSpec`
```

```
spec1 :: Specification (Int,Int,Int,Int) 
spec1 = constrained' $ \ w x y z -> [w <. x, x <. y, y <. z]

prop2:: Gen Property
prop2 = do
   (w,x,y,z) <- genFromSpec spec1
   pure $ (w < x && x < y && y < z) ==> property (w < z)
```

Now the test passes.

```
ghci> quickCheck prop2
+++ OK, passed 100 tests.
```

> Now this isn't a very good test either, since the precedant is alway true. A better solution would be to
> generate a mix, where the precedent is True most of the time, but sometimes False.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
Now this isn't a very good test either, since the condition is always true. A better solution would be to
generate a mix, where the condition is `True` most of the time, but sometimes `False`.
```

```
prop3:: Gen Property
prop3 = do
   (w,x,y,z) <- frequency [(9,genFromSpec spec1),(1,arbitrary)]
   pure $ (w < x && x < y && y < z) ==> property (w < z)   
```

Observe the result:

```
ghci> quickCheck prop3
+++ OK, passed 100 tests; 7 discarded.
```
This makes it possible to write conditional 'implication' properties that have a high probability of

> not being vacuosly true. 

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
not being vacuously true.
```

Note that (1) we introduced more variables than were initially in the
constraints - these need to be bound somewhere - and (2) the order of
`fst p = x` is important, `p` depends on `x`,  and not the other way
around.

> To do both of these things at the same time we introduce the `letBind` construct

Reviewer: It would be more useful maybe to talk about `match` since we're in the manual. `letBind` should be discouraged for end users unless they really know what they're doing.

Author: So this is really just the old comments moved here. I will redo this is terms of match.

then the constraint (`IsProductType a`) is met, and the interpretation of the `FunTy` is a function with **n** parameters.

```

> FunTy (MapList Term (ProductAsList a)) p ====>  t1 -> t2 -> ... -> tn -> p

Reviewer: ```suggestion
type FunTy (MapList Term (ProductAsList a)) p = t1 -> t2 -> ... -> tn -> p
```

## For all elements in a container type (List, Set, Map)
1.  `forAll :: (Forallable t a, HasSpec t, HasSpec a, IsPred p) => Term t -> (Term a -> p) -> Pred`

Used to impose a constraint on every element of a container type. There are three `forallable` instances in the Base system.

```
class Forallable t e | t -> e where
instance Ord k => Forallable (Map k v) (k, v)
instance Ord a => Forallable (Set a) a
instance Forallable [a] a
```

Here is an example of its use.

```
ex6 :: Specification [Int]
ex6 = constrained $ \ xs -> 
      forAll xs $ \ x -> [ x <=. 10, x >. 1] 
```

## Reification
1.  `reifies :: (HasSpec a, HasSpec b) => Term b -> Term a -> (a -> b) -> Pred`
2.  `reify :: (HasSpec a, HasSpec b, IsPred p) => Term a -> (a -> b) -> (Term b -> p) -> Pred`
3.  `assertReified :: (HasSpec Bool, HasSpec a) => Term a -> (a -> Bool) -> Pred`

Reification is used to produce a constrained value that can be obtained as a pure function from another
constrained value. This ensures a known relationship between the two. That relationship is exactly
the pure function used to obtain the second from the first. This comes in several flavors, two of which

> have an internal (hidden)  existential constraint.

Reviewer: I don't think "pure function" is precisely the right concept here. I think it's better to talk about "haskell-level" or "meta-level" function. There are some good motivating examples of this in the ledger code-base that we should have a look at and maybe re-use here?

Author: Good point. I have restructured this text to make that point.

The first use `(reifies b a f)` says term `b` can be obtained from term `a` using the pure function `f`. Here is an example of its use.

```
ex7 :: Specification (Int,[Int])
ex7 = constrained $ \ pair ->
      match pair $ \ n xs ->
      reifies n xs sum
```

The second operation `reify` can be defined using `reifies` by placing an existential constraint on the range of the function.
Here is an example of the use of `reify`

```
ex8 :: Specification ([Int],[Int])
ex8 = constrained $ \ pair ->
      match pair $ \ xs1 xs2 -> 
       [ assert $ sizeOf_ xs1 <=. 5
       , forAll xs1 $ \ x ->  x <=. 10
       , reify xs1 reverse $ \ t -> xs2 ==. t
       ]

> ```

Reviewer: Talk about `reverse` not existing as `reverse_` in the system.

Reviewer: Which is why we need to use `reify` here

Author: done

```
caseOn
  :: Term a
     -> FunTy
          (MapList
             (Weighted Binder) (Constrained.Spec.SumProd.Cases (SimpleRep a)))
          Pred
```

The way to interpret this, is that `caseOn` is a function we apply to a `(Term a)` and *n* different cases, one for each
of the constructors of type `a`. Each case is either weighted (using `(weight, branchW ...)` or
unweighted using `(branch ...)`, where the `...` is a function with *m* parameters, one for each of the 
subcomponents of that constructor). First we introduce a sum of products type `Three` and use the GHC.Generics
instance to derive the HasSpec instance.

```
data Three = One Int | Two Bool | Three Int deriving (Ord, Eq, Show, Generic)
instance HasSimpleRep Three
instance HasSpec Three
```

Here is an example using the unweighted mechanism.

```
ex10 :: Specification Three
ex10 = constrained $ \ three ->
       caseOn three
          (branch $ \ i -> i ==. 1)          -- One
          (branch $ \ b -> assert (not_ b))  -- Two
          (branch $ \ j -> j ==. 3)          -- Three

> ```

Reviewer: Using `monitor` here and checking the distribution we get from `genFromSpec` might be a useful exercise too - so that people know how to check their work with `branchW`.

Author: I added an example like this in the monitor section.

> Note the trailing Haskell comments, remind us which constructor we are dealing with. The system

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Note the trailing Haskell comments, they remind us which constructor we are dealing with. The system
```

expects the branches to be in the same order the constructors are introduced in the `data` defintions for `Three`

Here is another example using the weighted mechanism.

```
ex11 :: Specification Three
ex11 = constrained $ \ three ->
       caseOn three
          (branchW 1 $ \ i -> i <. 0)        -- One, weight 1
          (branchW 2 $ \ b -> assert b)      -- Two, weight 2
          (branchW 3 $ \ j -> j >. 0)        -- Three, weight 3
```

The second way to specify disjunctions is to choose `chooseSpec`, where the thwo choices use the same
constuctor of the type, but are distinguished logically by the two input specifications. The type of
`chooseSpec` is as follows, where the `Int` determines the frequency of each choice.

```
chooseSpec:: HasSpec a => (Int, Specification a) -> (Int, Specification a) -> Specification a
```

Here is an example.

```
ex12 :: Specification (Int,[Int])
ex12 = chooseSpec 
         (5, constrained $ \ pair ->
             match pair $ \ total xs -> [ total >. lit 10, sum_ xs ==. total , sizeOf_ xs ==. lit 3])
         (3, constrained $ \ pair -> 
             match pair $ \ total xs -> [ total <. lit 10, sum_ xs ==. total, sizeOf_ xs ==. lit 6])
```

> 

Reviewer: It _might_ be instructive to show and talk about the definition of `chooseSpec`?

Author: Perhaps in the (as yet unwritten) section about GenT. Though we might waive our hands a bit in this section.

                           
ex2 :: Specification Int                      
ex2 = constrained $ \ x -> x ==. lit 3

> -- Any Haskell term,  with type (Term Bool)

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
-- Any Haskell term, with type (Term Bool)
```

Author: done

then the constraint (`IsProductType a`) is met, and the interpretation of the `FunTy` is a function with **n** parameters.

```
type FunTy (MapList Term (ProductAsList a)) p = t1 -> t2 -> ... -> tn -> p
``` 

# Library functions to build Term, Pred, Specification

## From Term to Pred

> 1.   `assert :: IsPred p => p -> Pred`

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
1. `assert :: IsPred p => p -> Pred`
```

Author: good catch

variables for each of those components. The following library functions make that easier, because they are
predefined to compose the unprimed base library functions with `match`

1.  `forAll'`
2.  `constrained'`
3.  `reify'`

Here are three examples using these primed library functions. Each example has two parts. The first part
defined interms of the un-primed function and `match`, and the second defined nterms of the primed librbary function.

The primed version of `forAll` is `forAll'`

```
ex13a :: Specification [(Int,Int)]
ex13a = constrained $ \ xs -> 
      forAll xs $ \ x -> match x $ \ a b -> a ==. negate b 

ex13b :: Specification [(Int,Int)]
ex13b = constrained $ \ xs -> 
      forAll' xs $ \ a b -> a ==. negate b  
``` 

The primed version of `constrained` is `constrained'`

```
ex14a :: Specification (Int,Int,Int)
ex14a = constrained $ \ triple ->
        match triple $ \ a b c -> [ b ==. a + lit 1, c ==. b + lit 1]

ex14b :: Specification (Int,Int,Int)
ex14b = constrained' $ \ a b c -> [ b ==. a + lit 1, c ==. b + lit 1]        
```

The primed version of `reify` is `reify'`

```
ex15a :: Specification (Int,Int,Int)
ex15a = constrained $ \ triple ->

>           match triple $ \ x1 x2 x3-> 

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
          match triple $ \ x1 x2 x3 -> 
```

Author: done

            reify x1 (\ a -> (a+1,a+2)) $ \ t ->  
               match t $ \ b c -> [x2 ==. b, x3 ==. c]

ex15b :: Specification (Int,Int,Int)
ex15b = 
  constrained $ \ triple ->
    match triple $ \ x1 x2 x3-> 
      reify' x1 (\ a -> (a+1,a+2)) $ \ b c -> [x2 ==. b, x3 ==. c]   
```

## Constructors and Selectors
1.  `onCon`
2.  `sel`
4.  `isJust`

In Haskell we can define data types with multiple constructors, and constructors with multiple sub-components.

> The library functions `OnCon`, `sel`, and `isJust`, allow us to constrain such types in a way less verbose

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
The library functions `onCon`, `sel`, and `isJust`, allow us to constrain such types in a way less verbose
```

Author: done

`left` cannot be simultaneously equal to `right` and `right + lit 1`

```
ex22a :: Specification (Int,Int)
ex22a = constrained $ \ pair -> 
       match pair $ \ left right ->
	      [ left ==. right, left ==. right + lit 1]
```

When attempt to solve this specitication for `pair` we get the following error message

```
debugSpec ex22a
StepPlan for variable: v_1 fails to produce Specification, probably overconstrained. 
Original spec ErrorSpec
  Intersecting: 
    MemberSpec [20]
    MemberSpec [19]
  Empty intersection
```

Note the error message is in terms of the internal Term name `v1`. Which is not very useful.

To make error messages clearer we can name Haskell lambda bound variables using `[var|left|]` instead of just `left`.  In order to do this we must have the following directives in our file.

```
{-# LANGUAGE QuasiQuotes #-}
{-# LANGUAGE ViewPatterns #-}
```

Here is the same example using this naming schema.

```
ex22b :: Specification (Int,Int)
ex22b = constrained $ \ [var|pair|] -> 
         match pair $ \ [var|left|] [var|right|] -> [ left ==. right, left ==. right + lit 1]
```

We now get a better error message

```
ghci> debugSpec ex22b

> StepPlan for variable: left_1 fails to produce Specification, probably overconstrained.PS = 

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
StepPlan for variable: left_1 fails to produce Specification, probably overconstrained.
```
The previous error message didn't have this, so I assume this was an accident.

Author: yes, I thin that came from cut and paste, to move sections around. Thanks for pointing it out.

		   
		   -- second lambda, introduces name for hidden value 'y'
           (\ [var|y|] -> [Assert $ oddx ==. y + y + 1]) 
```

One might ask what is the role of the parameter `eval` in the first lambda expression passed to `exists`.
Recall that we are trying assist the function `conformsToSpec` in determining if a completely known value
	conforms to the specification. In this context, every Term variable is known. But in the specification we only have variables with type `(Term a)`,  what we need are variables with type `a`. The `eval` function 
with type

```
eval :: Term a -> a
```

lets us access those values. In the example the Term variable `(oddx :: Term Int)` is in scope, so
`(eval oddx :: Int)`, and since this is only used when calling `conformsToSpec`, we actually have the
value of the `oddx` for `eval` to return. Finally `(div (eval oddx - 1) 2))` tells us how to compute the value of the hidden variable. 

## Conditionals
1.  `whenTrue`
2.  `ifElse`

If one has a term `x` with type `(Term Bool)` one could use the value of this term to
define a Specification conditional on this term by using the `(caseOn x ...)` library function.

> There are two more concise library function one cam use instead.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
There are two more concise library function one can use instead.
```

Author: done
